Update Installation-for-Linux.md adding PipeWire usage. (#980)
jamulussoftware/jamulussoftware.github.io: wiki/en/Installation-for-Linux.md

## Set up your hardware

> If no instance of a JACK server is running, one is normally started automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no instance of a JACK server is running, one typically starts automatically.
```

I'm not sure when this isn't automatic (the abnormal case). Is the manual case abnormal? Atypical? Special? Unusual?

Author: I think the best way to understand how it works is to test it and see what happens.
As that's not what this PR is about, I think we should concentrate on PipeWire, especially as this sentence hasn't been changed by my commits.

Reviewer: I think hitting accept is often easy and appropriate for any improvement in any PR. But if you don't believe I've improved anything, most certainly say so. Your suggestion indicates that you might not know the right answer to the specific nuance I was clarifying, though you thumbed it up. If you aren't certain it's an improvement, perhaps err with caution by not accepting the change. Some suggest that such improvements occupy their own PR, but that doesn't happen so I try this.

Author: From my point of view, opening an issue to submit a problem and if it is actually a real problem, submit a PR to solve the problem linking the issue to solve the problem is the best way to stay readable and understandable inside a multideveloppers project. That's why I am writting that.
I don't know how Jamulus behaves when there's no JACK server running. You are right.

Author: What I can say about JACK's clients behaviour is that when no server is running, the client is starting a server.
The server doesn't start automatically by itself.

Reviewer: After 20 years in these settings, I've concluded that content production shouldn't operate like code production. Our users need readable and understandable information and I will keep trying to deliver it with your help. Imagine what can happen when small but straightforward improvements have a low-friction chance to go live.

Author: Thanks a lot for your help.
This sentence says :
"If no instance of JACK server is actually running when the client starts, Jamulus client will try to start a new one in order to be able to connect to it. In some cases the instance is not started but in a normal case, it will with no errors."

Reviewer: When Jamulus client starts a new instance of JACK server, it typically runs just fine? I haven't tested any of this, as you suggested. But would you consider:

"If no instance of JACK server is running when Jamulus Client starts, it will start a new instance and connect to it. A misconfiguration or error might prevent the JACK server from starting."

This separates the happy path from the error scenario. Do you think _misconfiguration and error_ cover the failure scenarios you're aware of? Is it always a misconfiguration? Perhaps lack of RAM? How common are failure scenarios?

Author: > When Jamulus client starts a new instance of JACK server, it typically runs just fine?

Yes.
> "If no instance of JACK server is running when Jamulus Client starts, it will start a new instance and connect to it. A misconfiguration or error might prevent the JACK server from starting."
> 
> This separates the happy path from the error scenario. Do you think _misconfiguration and error_ cover the failure scenarios you're aware of?

No, it is more complex than that. And that's why the preferred method is to start a JACK server before running Jamulus client.
> Is it always a misconfiguration? Perhaps lack of RAM? How common are failure scenarios?

It is not always a misconfiguration, it can be the unplugged audio interface, the audio card already used by another software ... for example. Not a lack of RAM. I don't know how common are failure scenarios.

Author: Changing everything with the two last commits. Should outdate this discussion.

Author: Resolving.

> Jamulus will attach to a running JACK instance by name, using the `JACK_DEFAULT_SERVER` environment variable or `default` if the variable is not set.

Reviewer: So sometimes the JACK instance is named `default` ?

Author: Maybe. I don't know.
Anyone?

Reviewer 2: Yes. I think so. At least Jamulus shows that.

Author: I will resolve this comment if anyone is ok as it is like that.

If your distribution uses JACK as the sound server, check out [how to configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).

If your distribution uses PipeWire by default, check out the section on [configuring PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire).

### Configure JACK with QjackCtl

Jamulus Clients need [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) to run, but you need to configure that first. The recommended method is to use `QjackCtl`.

1. Launch QjackCtl. You will see the **Qt JACK Control utility main page**.
2. Configure your audio hardware as follows (the exact settings for JACK will depend on what your audio hardware is capable of):

- Set the audio **Interface** to the one you want (there may be several in the list).
- Set the **Sample Rate to 48000**.

> - Set the **Frames/Period to 128** and Periods/Buffer at 2 at first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set the **Frames/Period to 128** and **Periods/Buffer at 2** at first.
```

Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect.

### Configure PipeWire

The Jamulus Client requires a JACK sound server (native PipeWire support has not yet been implemented).

> PipeWire provides a compatibility layer that emulates the JACK server, so when you launch the Jamulus Client, PîpeWire automatically exposes itself to it as a JACK server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PipeWire provides a compatibility layer that emulates the JACK server. When you launch the Jamulus Client, PîpeWire presents itself to Jamulus as a JACK server.
```

> PipeWire provides a compatibility layer that emulates the JACK server, so when you launch the Jamulus Client, however PîpeWire automatically exposes itself to it as a JACK server.

Reviewer 3: This sentence got a bit muddled up - "however" should be moved to the start or removed altogether.

You need to set your audio interface to the "pro-audio" profile and define PipeWire's "rate" and "quantum" parameters beforehand.
To do so, follow these steps:

> 1. open `pavucontrol` (the audio mixer) and choose the "pro-audio" profile in the configuration tab,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open `pavucontrol` (the audio mixer) and choose the "pro-audio" profile in the configuration tab.
```

2. In a terminal use the two following commands:
```bash
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-rate 48000
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-quantum 128

> ```

Reviewer 4: Do the PipeWire "profiles" get defined as config files anywhere?  Can they be imported or installed?  Can one profile be "based on" another?  Ideally, rather than providing shell commands, we'd provide a "Jamulus" profile and say "(import this and) make it active" -- the debian/ubuntu install could do it, making it even easier, then.

Author: PipeWire is using pulseaudio's profiles or AlsaRaw when using pro-audio profiles.
I don't know where it is written but, as we don't do anything for JACK's users, I think we "can not" do the same for PipeWire's.

The PipeWire pro audio profile is explained [here](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/FAQ#what-is-the-pro-audio-profile).
The FAQ is talking about a [native GUI tool](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/FAQ#is-there-a-native-gui-tool-to-configure-pipewire)
There are also some info [here](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/FAQ#pipewire-buffering-explained) about the buffering.

Reviewer 4: It would be good to have a reference _directly_ to where `clock.force-rate` and `clock.force-quantum` are documented.  (And I mean referenced in our wiki.)

Author: Would a link to the page [jack-server](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/Config-JACK#jack-server) be sufficient?

Author: done in https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamuluswebsite/pull/980/commits/d1a3fbad686f22e2722074d92b5ea6ca601b886f

### Start Jamulus

With JACK or PipeWire configured, launch Jamulus.

> If you get problems with sound breaking up (in particular XRUN errors reported by JACK/QjackCtl) try setting bigger values (e.g. 256 frames or 3 periods). Lower ones (e.g. 64 frames) could bring better performance but maybe more sound problems. See the [troubleshooting page](Client-Troubleshooting) otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you get problems with sound breaking up (in particular XRUN errors reported by JACK/QjackCtl) try setting bigger values (e.g. 256 frames or 3 periods). Lower ones (e.g. 64 frames) could bring better performance but might also bring more sound problems. See [the troubleshooting page](Client-Troubleshooting) otherwise.
```

## Set up your hardware

> The Jamulus client needs to connect to a running [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server in order to start. You need to find out which is the low-latency sound server of your distribution.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Jamulus Client needs to connect to a running [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server in order to start. You need to find out which is the low-latency sound server for your distribution.
```

> - If your distribution uses [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/), check out how to [configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- If your distribution uses [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/), see how to [configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).
```

> - If your distribution uses PipeWire, check out how to [configure PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- If your distribution uses PipeWire, see how to [configure PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire).
```

### Configure JACK with QjackCtl

To run a [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server, the recommended method is to use `QjackCtl`.

1. Launch QjackCtl. You will see the **Qt JACK Control utility main page**.

> 2. Configure your sound hardware as follows (except where noted):

Reviewer 2: Except where noted -> what does that mean? I'd rather get rid of that.

Author: @pljones certainly knows.
It is in this commit:
commit 87aff02ce2069de4a9d4c8d7c5e3750c3018e36f

Reviewer 4: Did you mean some other commit?
```
87aff02ce wiki/en/Installation-for-Linux.md    (Julien Taverna     2023-12-30 22:27:39 +0100  65) 2. Configure your audio hardware as follows (except where noted):
```

Reviewer 4: Ah, you mean here: https://github.com/jamulussoftware/jamuluswebsite/pull/980#pullrequestreview-1799544715

I think I was expecting to see some explanation of how "the exact settings for JACK will depend on what your audio hardware is capable of" would affect the settings chosen, those being noted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Configure your sound hardware as follows:
```

Or 

```suggestion
2. Configure your sound hardware (your configuration should look comparable, but may slightly differ for each audio device):
```

```suggestion
2. Configure your sound hardware (your configuration should look comparable, but may slightly differ your sound hardware):
```

> 2. Configure your audio hardware as follows (except where noted):

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Configure your sound hardware as follows (except where noted):
```

- Set the audio **Interface** to the one you want (there may be several in the list - choose the correct one as this cannot be changed without stopping Jamulus and JACK).
- Set the **Sample Rate to 48000**.
- Set the **Frames/Period to 128** and **Periods/Buffer at 2** at first.

Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect and continue from the [Start Jamulus](Installation-for-Linux#start-jamulus) section below.

### Configure PipeWire

PipeWire provides its own JACK server. When you launch the Jamulus Client, PipeWire automatically runs a JACK server. However, there are a few parameters to adjust.
You need to set your audio interface to the "pro-audio" profile and define PipeWire's "rate" and "quantum" parameters beforehand.
You can find more information about the configuration in the [PipeWire wiki](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/Config-JACK#jack-server).

To set up your system:

> 1. Open `pavucontrol` (the audio mixer) and choose the "pro-audio" profile for your audio interface in the configuration tab.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Open `pavucontrol` (the audio mixer) and choose the "pro-audio" profile for your sound hardware in the configuration tab.
```

> 2. In a terminal use the two following commands to force PipeWire's rate and quantum:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. In a terminal use the following two commands to force PipeWire's rate and quantum:
```

```bash
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-rate 48000
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-quantum 128
```
After this, continue from the [Start Jamulus](Installation-for-Linux#start-jamulus) section below.

### Start Jamulus

With JACK or PipeWire configured, launch Jamulus.

> If you have any problems setting up, first check [the troubleshooting page](Client-Troubleshooting).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you have any problems, first check [the troubleshooting page](Client-Troubleshooting).
```

## Set up your hardware

The Jamulus client needs to connect to a running [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server in order to start. You need to find out which is the low-latency sound server of your distribution.

> You need to find out which is the low-latency sound server of your distribution:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Seems to be a duplicate.

- If your distribution uses [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/), check out how to [configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).
- If your distribution uses PipeWire, check out how to [configure PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire).

### Configure JACK with QjackCtl

> To run a [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server, the Jamulus team's recommended method is to use `QjackCtl`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run a [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server, the recommended method is to use `QjackCtl`.
```

1. Launch QjackCtl. You will see the **Qt JACK Control utility main page**.
2. Configure your audio hardware as follows (except where noted):

- Set the audio **Interface** to the one you want (there may be several in the list - choose the correct one as this cannot be changed without stopping Jamulus and JACK).
- Set the **Sample Rate to 48000**.
- Set the **Frames/Period to 128** and **Periods/Buffer at 2** at first.

Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect and continue from the [Start Jamulus](Installation-for-Linux#start-jamulus) section below.

### Configure PipeWire

PipeWire provides its own JACK server. When you launch the Jamulus Client, PipeWire automatically runs a JACK server. However, there are a few parameters to adjust.
You need to set your audio interface to the "pro-audio" profile and define PipeWire's "rate" and "quantum" parameters beforehand.

> More informations about the configuration in the [PipeWire's wiki](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/Config-JACK#jack-server).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find more information about the configuration in the [PipeWire wiki](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/Config-JACK#jack-server).
```

or you can find more information about the configuration in PipeWires' wiki. 

A native speaker should judge.

> Follow these steps to set up your system:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set up your system:
```

## Set up your hardware

The Jamulus client needs to connect to a running [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server in order to start. You need to find out which is the low-latency sound server of your distribution.

> If your distribution uses JACK, check out how to [configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl), on the other hand, if it is PipeWire, check out the section called [configure PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire) instead.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If your distribution uses `jackd`, check out how to [configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).
- If your distribution uses PipeWire as a JACK server, check out the section called [configure PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire) instead.
```

Author: I don't know if people who needs this article understand what is jackd and/or jackdbus...
That's why I think "JACK" has to be prefered.

Reviewer 4: > The Jamulus client needs to connect to a running [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server in order to start.

This is wrong, then.  Jamulus doesn't _care_ whether it's a running JACK server or JACK provided by PipeWire.  Maybe reword to this?
```
You need to find out which is the low-latency sound server of your distribution:
- If your distribution uses [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/), check out how to [configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).
- If your distribution uses PipeWire, check out how to [configure PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire).

Author: done

### Configure JACK with QjackCtl

To run a [JACK](https://jackaudio.org/) server, the Jamulus team's recommended method is to use `QjackCtl`.

1. Launch QjackCtl. You will see the **Qt JACK Control utility main page**.

> 2. Configure your audio hardware as follows (the exact settings for JACK will depend on what your audio hardware is capable of):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Configure your audio hardware as follows (except where noted):
```

> - Set the audio **Interface** to the one you want (there may be several in the list).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Set the audio **Interface** to the one you want (there may be several in the list - choose the correct one as this cannot be changed without stopping Jamulus and JACK).
```

- Set the **Sample Rate to 48000**.
- Set the **Frames/Period to 128** and **Periods/Buffer at 2** at first.

> Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect and rendez-vous at [start Jamulus](Installation-for-Linux#start-jamulus) section.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect and continue from the [Start Jamulus](Installation-for-Linux#start-jamulus) section below.
```

### Configure PipeWire

PipeWire provides its own JACK server. When you launch the Jamulus Client, PipeWire automatically runs a JACK server. However, there are a few parameters to adjust.
You need to set your audio interface to the "pro-audio" profile and define PipeWire's "rate" and "quantum" parameters beforehand.
More informations about the configuration in the [PipeWire's wiki](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/wikis/Config-JACK#jack-server).

Follow these steps to set up your system:
1. Open `pavucontrol` (the audio mixer) and choose the "pro-audio" profile for your audio interface in the configuration tab.
2. In a terminal use the two following commands to force PipeWire's rate and quantum:
```bash
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-rate 48000
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-quantum 128
```

> After that, you can continue reading the rest of this documentation. Your system is ready.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After this, continue from the [Start Jamulus](Installation-for-Linux#start-jamulus) section below.
```

### Start Jamulus

With JACK or PipeWire configured, launch Jamulus.

> If you get problems with sound breaking up (in particular XRUN errors reported by JACK/QjackCtl) try setting bigger values (e.g. 256 frames or 3 periods).

Reviewer 4: If this _only_ applies to `jackd`, that should be made clear.  Otherwise, it needs explaining in a way that applies to both `jackd` and PipeWire.

Author: I would prefer to remove this sentence.

Author: Done.

## Set up your hardware

> If your distribution uses JACK as sound server, go to "Configure JACK with QjackCtl".

Reviewer 3: If your distribution uses JACK as **the** sound server

Reviewer 3: Also, I think it'd be better to create a link to the relevant section:

go to "Configure JACK with QjackCtl". -> check out `[how to configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl)`.

> If your distribution uses JACK as sound server, go to "Configure JACK with QjackCtl".

Reviewer 5: Is this something we could detect and automate with the .deb install?

Author: The sound server is a choice made by the distribution and/or the user.
We explain that a configuration is needed for JACK or PipeWire.
I don't think we need to go any further.
What's more, I don't know how to do it concretely.

Author: A script?

> If your distribution uses JACK as the sound server, check out [how to configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If no instance of a JACK server is running, one is normally started automatically.

Jamulus will attach to a running JACK instance by name, using the `JACK_DEFAULT_SERVER` environment variable or `default` if the variable is not set.

If your distribution uses JACK as the sound server, check out [how to configure JACK with QjackCtl](Installation-for-Linux#configure-jack-with-qjackctl).
```

> If your distribution uses PipeWire by default, go to "Configure PipeWire".

Reviewer 3: Same here: 

check out the section on `[configuring PipeWire](Installation-for-Linux#configure-pipewire)`

Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect

### Configure PipeWire

> Jamulus Clients need a JACK server included in PipeWire. It is automatically launched when Jamulus is started.

Reviewer 3: My understanding is that PipeWire uses a compatibility layer to make JACK applications _think_ the JACK server is present (when it's not), so maybe this should be worded differently.

Author: PipeWire runs a "fake" JACK server with its own API and Library. From the client point, it is a JACK server.
The goal here is to say:
- You, the user, use the JACK parameter in Jamulus, whether you're using JACK or PipeWire.

Reviewer 3: Ok, how about:

"The Jamulus Client requires a JACK sound server (native PipeWire support has not yet been implemented). However, PipeWire provides a compatibility layer that emulates the JACK server, so when you launch the Jamulus Client, PîpeWire automatically exposes itself to it as a JACK server."

> However, you need to set your audio interface to "pro-audio" profile and define PipeWire's "rate" and "quantum" parameters beforehand.

Reviewer 3: you need to set your audio interface to **the** "pro-audio" profile

To do so, follow these steps:

> 1. open `pavucontrol` (the audio mixer) and choose "pro-audio" profile in configuration tab,

Reviewer 3: choose **the** "pro-audio" profile in **the** configuration tab,

2. In a terminal use the two following commands:

>    - pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-rate 48000

Reviewer 3: Probably better to use code tags for these commands.

> Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Restart JACK for the new settings to take effect.
```
And full stops at the end of each of the bullets above this, please.

### Configure PipeWire

> Jamulus Clients need a JACK server included in PipeWire. It is automatically launched when Jamulus is started.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Jamulus Clients need a JACK server included in PipeWire.
```
> It is automatically launched when Jamulus is started.

This is not very explanatory.  I've suggested a para right at the start of the section on JACK about Jamulus auto-starting the server.  If this will differ between JACK standalone and PipeWire JACK, that will need stating in _both_ sections clearly.

> However, you need to set your audio interface to the "pro-audio" profile and define PipeWire's "rate" and "quantum" parameters beforehand.

Reviewer 4: I don't thing "However" is appropriate -- the style in the earlier section should be followed: be directive.

To do so, follow these steps:
1. open `pavucontrol` (the audio mixer) and choose the "pro-audio" profile in the configuration tab,
2. In a terminal use the two following commands:
```bash
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-rate 48000
pw-metadata -n settings 0 clock.force-quantum 128
```

### Start Jamulus

> With JACK or PipeWire running and configured, launch Jamulus.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With JACK or PipeWire configured, launch Jamulus.
```

Reviewer 4: And then a para saying to try with JACK/PipeWire running if running Jamulus didn't start it up automatically.  We'll want bug reports on this because it should just work.

With JACK or PipeWire configured, launch Jamulus.

> See [the troubleshooting page](Client-Troubleshooting) otherwise.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you have any problems setting up, first check [the troubleshooting page](Client-Troubleshooting).
```
